# Introduction 
This repo hosts the code for a new Machine Learning process to detect microplastic particles on liquids using Spectral Flow Cytometry Data and classify them according to their type and color.
The Method processes RAW FCS files (not unmixed) generated by Cytek Aurora instruments equipped with 5 lasers (355 nm, 405 nm, 488 nm, 561 nm, 640 nm) with Area, Height and Width signals on all parameters (only Area signals are used by the algorithm). Threshold were set at SSC=5000, FSC, SSC and SSC-B gains set to 1, and all other gains increased (+400 % for UV and Violet detectors, +300 % for Blue detectors, +800 % for Yellow-Green and Red detectors). These values must be adapted for each instrument
Are provided scripts to train and use the models.

# Getting Started
Create a python enviroment according to the "requirements.txt" file and python 3.9.0.
Configure the parameters on the "training_config.json" file according to your instrument settings.

# Usage
## Training models
Training is devided into two steps:
1. Preprocessing the FCS files to train the model. The FCS files should be inside of two folders: a folder representing the standards and another folder representing Not Microplastics (NMP). The input folders can be configured in the "training_config.json" file. To run the preprocessing step please use the the follwing command:  <<python preprocess.py -o "preprocessed file path">>, example: <<python preprocess.py -o "./tmp/preprocessed.csv">>
2. Training the models using the preprocessed file. Three models are trained: one to detect microplastics, one to classify the microplastic type and another to classify the microplastic color. The models settings can be configured using the "training_config.json". With the models, two other files are created: one file with the configuration used to train the model that will be used to run the model when detecting microplastics "model_config.json", and file with the training/evaluation statistics including metrics like precision, recall, F1 and two confusion matrix "stats.json". Run training using the following command <<python trainModels.py -i "preprocessed file path" -o "model folder path">>. example: <<python trainModels.py -i "./tmp/preprocessed.csv" -o "./model">>

## Microplastic Detection
The detection of microplastics using trained models is devided into two steps:
1. Preprocessing the FCS file to analyse. To run the preprocessing please execute the following command: <<python preprocess.py -i "fcs file" -o "preproccessed file" -m "model folder path">>. Example: <<python preprocess.py -i "test.fcs" -o "preprocessed.csv" -m "./model">>
2. Classification of the detected particles. A csv file is generated providing the classification of each particle and the confidence score. To run the classification please use the following command: <<python classification.py -i "preproccessed file" -o "classification file output" -m "model folder path">>. Example:  <<python classification.py -i "preprocessed.csv" -o "classification.csv" -m "./model">>

## License - please refer to LICENSE.txt
This repository is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0).

You may use, share, and adapt the code for non-commercial purposes only, provided that:
- You give appropriate credit.
- You apply the same CC BY-NC-SA license to any derivative works.

Commercial use is strictly prohibited.

Full license text: [CC BY-NC-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/)

## External Dependencies
This project may refer to third-party tools (e.g., flowio, pandas, etc.) under their respective licenses.  
Please consult their documentation for license terms. This repository does **not** redistribute these tools or any external data.
